# An Overview for Deploying a Wordpress Site with Terraform and AWS Lightsail
## Infrastructure as Code enables us to automate and provision resources consistently and effeciently 

### In the Beginning

To start designing the site with Wordpress, I downloaded an application called Local. Local allows you to build and design the site hosted on your computer, 
so you don't need to worry about setting up and paying for hosting at first. It includes some nice features and even has an option to produce a live link
to your site so you can show someone over the internet how the site is progressing. I am not going to go into the details of actually building the site.
I will however include the link to the video I watched that helped me get a better understanding of how Wordpress works and how to make your site look
professional. 

Once the website is built, you can use the plugin "All-In-One migration" to export the files into a folder. When the Lightsail instance is deployed and
you log into Wordpress, you can use this same plugin to import the website.


### IaC and Terraform
Having studied in a cloud computing program in university, I am quite familiar with deploying and setting up cloud resources and infrastructure. AWS is my 
provider of choice but I have dabbled with Azure and Digital Ocean as well and these platforms are very similar. Provisioning scalable, secure environments 
in the cloud becomes even easier with the management approach called Infrastructure as Code (IaC). IaC invovles creating configuration files describing the 
type of resources we want, the network environment they should exist in, and the type of programs and software we might want them to run. The tool I chose
to use to automate this wordpress deployment is Terraform, an IaC tool developed by HashiCorp. 

You'll need to integrate and configure your AWS account via the AWS Toolkit with the code editor of your choice, I use VS Code. You will also need to download 
and add the Terraform extension. After creating a folder for the project and running the 'terraform init' command to ensure all is well, it's time to begin coding.

To deploy resources, you interact with Terraform via the CLI. While there are many commands to utilize, I will list some of the most important. 

- terraform init - Initializes the project, downloads the necessary plugins and sets up the backend configuration

- terraform plan - Creates an execution plan, showing the changes that will be made before applying them

- terraform apply - Applies the changes specified in the execution plan (If you are impatient like me, you can add the '--auto-approve' flag to the end)

- terraform destroy - Destroys all resources created by Terraform in the current configuration

Since this is more of an overview than an actual tutorial, I will simply be touching on a few important aspects of the terraform configuration. I will include a
link to the full project on my github.  

Files in Terraform are saved with the .tf extension and the first file you'll likely work on is main.tf. The very beginning of main.tf includes the provider block.
This is where we tell Terraform which platform/provider to interact with so that the proper plugins and necessary configuration options for authentication are
used so we are able to connect to our chosen platform. 

```terraform 
  terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "4.14.0"
    }
  }
}

provider "aws" {
  region = var.region
}
```

### Wait What is Lightsail?
Before we get into deploying a Lightsail instance, we should probably understand what Lightsail is. AWS Lightsail is a cloud service provided by AWS that offers a simplified 
way to launch and manage virtual private servers, instances, databases, storage, etc. This service is geered towards developers and small businesses that need a straightforward 
yet scalable solution for web applications, websites, and more without dealing with the complexity of other full scale AWS components. This simplification is achieved by providing
a user-friendly interface, preconfigured instances, and a clear pricing model. Lightsail also integrates with other AWS services and can be tweaked and configured to better serve
your specific needs.



### More About Terraform and Deploying the Instance
When building a Terraform project, you will find it useful to break the code into separate files. For a smaller project like this one, I have about 4 files split into main.tf, variables.tf, output.tf, and a bash script file to be run on the instance after its deployed. Terraform has even more files included in each project like the tfstate file, which 
keeps track of the current configuration and deployed infrastructure. Each time you apply your code, the state changes. This is a file you don't want to mess with. If you're going
to be committing your code to github, you might include a gitignore file with extensions or files you do not want included in the repository.

The variables file is pretty self explanatory, it is where you will define and assign values to your various variables. In the code posted in the IaC section, you'll see that
variables are referenced using var.{variable}. In the variables file, the region variable is defined as such:

```terraform
  variable "region" {
  type    = string
  default = "us-east-1"
}
```
The output.tf file includes any output you wish to display from Terraform about the deployment. This is useful when dealing with instances, as planning and apply outputs
can become very long and searching for information about the resources can take time. This output file spits out the IP address assigned to the instance created after deployment.
This is especially useful for working with Wordpress, as that IP address will be the one we use to access the WP Admin dashboard.

```terraform
  output "instance_ip" {
  value = aws_lightsail_static_ip.static_ip.ip_address
}
```

To create a Lightsail instance, there are a few attributes you must define. The instance will need a name and an availability zone to be deployed in. You can also include a
blueprintid, allowing you to choose a preconfigured instance, which in this case is Wordpress. You will also need to define the bundleid, defining what size instance you need.

```terraform
resource "aws_lightsail_instance" "instance" {
  name              = var.instance
  availability_zone = var.instance_availability_zone
  blueprint_id      = var.instance_blueprintid
  bundle_id         = var.instance_bundleid
  key_pair_name     = var.instance_key_pair
  depends_on        = [aws_lightsail_static_ip.static_ip]
  tags = {
    Environment = "Dev"
  }
}
```

When working with this project, I realized that the order in which resources got provisioned and destroyed caused errors. Because the lightsail_static_ip was being destroyed
before the instance itself, an error would appear stating that there was no static ip associated with the instance (therefore nothing to destroy). By adding the "depends_on",
Terraform knows to create the static IP before the instance and also to destroy the instance before destroying the static IP. 


### Logging into Wordpress

If you were to connect via SSH to the instance that appears in Lightsail after the deployment, you would be greeted by a linux terminal. As previously stated, the Wordpress
dashboard is accessed via the browser at the specified IP address. The only reason we need to log into the linux machine is to retrieve the default password for our
Wordpress login. We can find this password with the command "cat $HOME/bitnami_application_password". I am still in the process of figuring out how to display this password
as part of the output, to skip the process of logging into the linux machine.

Now that you can log into the Wordpress dashboard, you can download the "All-In-One Wp Migration" plugin and use it to import the site build previously in Local. 








